---
title: "Python and the phantom parameters, part 2"
date: 2020-05-23T15:34:30-04:00
categories:
  - programming
tags:
  - python
---

Sometimes, when I stumble upon a problem while writing some good Python code, instead of trying to step back and think more about why the problem is here, I love to take the "what would be the most stupid and complex way to solve my problem" route.

## Ingredient 1 : A perfectly fine API
To illustrate my problem, I will use a fake API with 3 defined routes :

| HTTP method | URL | Expected payload | Expected return |
|--------|-------------|--------|---------------------|
| POST   | /thing      | `{"size": int }` | `{"id": int }` |
| GET    | /thing/{id} | `{}` | `{"id": int, "size": int, "price": int}` |
| DELETE | /thing/{id} | `{}` | `{"success": bool}` |

All of these routes allows us to manipulate a fake object named `Thing`, a `Thing` has three attributes, a unique `id` used to manipulate it, a `size` and a `price`.

## Ingredient 2 : A cool Python client-code generator

Now that I have my API, I want to be able to consume it from my favorite programming language : Python.

I could take the lazy route and use the excellent `requests` module to do the API call.

```python
import requests

BASE_URL = "https://thingapi.sygmei.io"

thing = requests.post(f"{BASE_URL}/thing", json={"size": 22})
thing_id = thing.json()["id"]
thing_price = requests.get(f"{BASE_URL}/thing/{thing_id}").json()["price"]
requests.delete(f"{BASE_URL}/thing/{thing_id}")
```

Wrapping those calls hardly makes sense because there's not a lot of parameters, but we will still do it.. for science !

Now there is two way to wrap these API calls :
- You could go swagger-codegen style and output a bunch of .py files based on some templates.

*OR*
- You could spice your day a bit and decide that you don't want to generate any file. You want a module generated at runtime.

Of course we will pick the latter, it won't be fun otherwise.

Generating a module at runtime is not what we could call an everyday use-case but like always in Python, you've got your ass covered by the mighty snake.

TODO: Show a first version of imp with one function user-defined

```python
import imp
import requests

def make_rest_call(method, url):
    def make_rest_call_wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
        url_params = args[:url.count("{}")]
        return getattr(requests, method)(
            url.format(*url_params),
            *args[len(url_params)::],
            **kwargs
        ).json()
    return make_rest_call_wrapper

cool_api_module = imp.new_module("thing_api")

API_URL = "http://api.url"

cool_api_module.create_thing = make_rest_call("post", f"{API_URL}/thing")
cool_api_module.get_thing = make_rest_call("get", f"{API_URL}/thing/{{}}")
cool_api_module.delete_thing = make_rest_call("delete", f"{API_URL}/thing/{{}}")
```

To create a module, we can use Python's `imp` module with the `new_module` function.
The `make_rest_call` function basically takes a HTTP action (get, post, put, delete...) as first parameter and the route of the API as the second argument.
This function then returns another function which wraps the previous arguments, you just have to pass the additional arguments to `*args` and `**kwargs` which will be forwarded to the `requests` function call.
The wrapper also automatically returns the JSON representation of the result.
Of course this is an extremely simplistic implementation which doesn't handle errors.

You will then be able to use the client code like this :
```python
my_thing = cool_api_module.create_thing(json={"size": 30})
my_thing_price = cool_api_module.get_thing(my_thing["id"])["price"]
cool_api_module.delete_thing(my_thing["id"])
```

**Okay**, we already have a few bad ideas in actions but we need to add some more to get to my point.

## Ingredient 3 : The visual programming framework

Let's say you have a framework which takes a function as input and outputs a `Node` object.
This framework introspects the function inputs to allow the following :

```python
def add_function(a: int, b: int) -> int:
    """
    Addition: Adds two integers
    """
    return a + b

AddNode = node_framework.make_node(add_function)

addition = AddNode()
addition.set_input("a", 30)
addition.set_input("b", 55)

addition.execute()
assert addition.get_output() == 85
```

Before explaining what this code does, you have to imagine that `Node`s are actually graphical objects, think "Blueprint" from Unreal Engine, this is pretty much what we are trying to to with this `node_framework`.

**IMG**

The node_framework actually uses the Python inspect module to retrieve the parameters of the function passed as parameter in the make_node function. It also uses annotations to determine what kind of types the Node should accept as input and thus provides type checking.
Okay, this is neat but what does it have to do with our API from before ?

## Step 1 : Blend all ingredients together until you obtain a smooth puree

Now that we have all the building blocks in place, it is time to do something with them !
We want to provide a sleek UI for non-programmers that will allow them to sequence some API calls without ever touching one line of code.Good grief, we have a visual programming framework in our hands, let's use it !

```python
CreateThingNode = node_framework.make_node(cool_api_module.create_thing)
create_thing = CreateThingNode()
create_thing.set_input("thing_size", 30)

GetThingNode = node_framework.make_node(cool_api_module.get_thing)
get_thing = GetThingNode()
get_thing.set_input("thing_id", create_thing.get_output("thing_id"))

DeleteThingNode = node_framework.make_node(cool_api_module.delete_thing)
delete_thing = DeleteThingNode()
delete_thing.set_input("thing_id", create_thing.get_output("thing_id"))

create_thing.then(get_thing).then(delete_thing)
```

**IMG**

For each action, we create a `Node` "class" which is dynamically created by the framework when calling the `make_node` function. This allows us to instantiate multiple nodes of the same type (even if right now, we only need one `Node` per type).

TODO: Explain the then part

But we have two problems right now, our `node_framework` only accept functions that are thoroughly annotated and our functions are not annotated and don't have positional arguments at all !

## Step 2 : Taste the dish to ensure proper spiciness

Remember this piece of code ?

```python
def make_rest_call(method, url):
    def make_rest_call_wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
        url_params = args[:url.count("{}")]
        return getattr(requests, method)(
            url.format(*url_params),
            *args[len(url_params)::],
            **kwargs
        ).json()
    return make_rest_call_wrapper
```

Those 9 lines made it easy to wrap all of our API calls but it is now an obstacle to our objective !
From now, there is two solutions :
- Return on our steps, realize that dynamic module generation is a bad idea in our case and generate static .py files that contains the client code
- Continue with what we have done so far and stack more bad decisions on top of it
Well, if you read the introduction of this blog post you probably know by now which of the two routes I will choose.

## Step 3 : Add some pepper and salt to raise the taste of your dish

Some of you might already have played with the Python debugger to inspect what is underneath a function in Python. If not, don't worry, I will cover the subject anyway.